docs: Design doc for HIP-632 `isAuthorizedRaw` (#13558)
hashgraph/hedera-services: hedera-node/docs/design/services/smart-contract-service/hedera-account-service-isAuthorized-design.md

HIP-632 as written refers a lot to 
[HIP-631](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-631) - "Account Virtual Addresses".
However, that HIP, though `Accepted` will not be implemented.  (Or at least, not
at any time soon.)  So HIP-632 needs to be read with that in mind.  Specifically, 
anywhere that there's a provision for dealing with "virtual addresses", of which there
may be several/many per Hedera account, there is in fact only _one_: the _alias_.

* This mainly affects the method `getVirtualAddresses` which will return an array, but
it will have _at most one_ EVM address in it.
* An issue is present to edit HIP-632 to clarify that it is dealing with aliases, not virtual addresses.  
  
## Phased implementation

The first release of HIP-632 will include only `isAuthorizedRaw`.

## Where does this go?

A "hedera account service" system contract is being set up in
`com.hedera.node.app.service.contract.impl.exec.systemcontracts.has`, and also at
`...contract.impl.exec.processors.HasTranslatorsModule` (for the individual methods).

Following the existing pattern for HAS each method will be given a package under 
`...contract.impl.exec.systemcontracts.has` with two classes:

> * `[method]Translator` - which first confirms that the call is for the given method, and

Reviewer: Technically we are not actually creating a TransactionBody in this case.  We normally do not if the function is a query type that does not change state and thus does not need to dispatch a TransactionBody to another service.

Author: I'll clarify that.

  then builds a `TransactionBody` for it.
* `[method]Call` - which takes that `TransactionBody` and then has an `execute()` method
  that does the work.
  
## Design for `isAuthorizedRaw`

`isAuthorizedRaw` has two flows: Either the argument address is a Hedera account, or it is
an EVM address.

* If an EVM address then this is simply the `ECRECOVER` precompile.  We have direct
access to the `ECRECOVER` precompile from BESU in the class
`org.hyperledger.besu.evm.precompile.ECRECPrecompiledContract` which will compute
the `ECRECOVER` operation given the message hash + signature (encoded as a calldata for
the precompile) (and a `MessageFrame` which it ignores).  This returns either the
recovered address, if successful, or "empty", if not.  The recovered address must then

> match the address given as an argument to `isAuthorizedRaw`.

Reviewer: It might be important to mention somewhere (perhaps the HIP is a better place for this) that the signature must be in the compressed form for `ecrecover` to succeed.  
I don't know if we want to relax this necessity in the future by implementing our own recover method verses what Besu does?

Author: Wait - I thought that was only when you were doing the signing that in the test code you needed the 64 byte form?

Reviewer: Yes the 65 byte form but it should be constructed using the compressed form and attaching the `v` value.  I think if this is what I had to do to get the test to work, anyone trying to use the function will have to do the same?

Author: Not sure.  The (internal) doc that motivated this call showed examples from various sources including Uniswap v2 and v3 where their contract functions that actually called ECRECOVER had passed in `r`, s`, and `v` as separate arguments, plus another example from 0x protocol where they had a datatype `Signature` that had separate `r`, `s`, and `v` fields.  So, based on that data set, having the separate components of the signature available seems common, or, at least, familiar.

>   * 3000gas will be charged to match `ECRECOVER` behavior

Reviewer: Are we not charging 1.5M gas for the function call?

Author: Hmm. Yes.  That's wrong.  I'll fix it ASAP.

# HIP-632 (Hedera Account Service) `isAuthorized{Raw}` design

This note addresses the implementation of `isAuthorized` and `isAuthorizedRaw` of 
[HIP-632](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-632) - "Hedera Account Service (HAS) 
System Contract".

## Preliminary notice w.r.t. "virtual addresses"

HIP-632 as written refers a lot to 
[HIP-631](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-631) - "Account Virtual Addresses".
However, that HIP, though `Accepted` will not be implemented.  (Or at least, not

> at any time soon.)  So -632 needs to be read with that in mind.  Specifically, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
at any time soon.)  So HIP-632 needs to be read with that in mind.  Specifically, 
```
```suggestion
at any time soon.)  So -632 needs to be read with that in mind.  Specifically, 
```

anywhere that there's a provision for dealing with "virtual addresses", of which there
may be several/many per Hedera account, there is in fact only _one_: the _alias_.

* This mainly affects the method `getVirtualAddresses` which will return an array, but
it will have _at most one_ EVM address in it.
  
## Phased implementation

> The first release of -631 will include only `isVirtualAddress` and `isAuthorizedRaw`.

Reviewer 2: We shouldn't do anything related VirtualAddresses at this point
```suggestion
The first release of HIP-631 will include only `isAuthorizedRaw`.
```

## Where does this go?

A "hedera account service" system contract is being set up in
`com.hedera.node.app.service.contract.impl.exec.systemcontracts.has`, and also at
`...contract.impl.exec.processors.HasTranslatorsModule` (for the individual methods).

Following the existing pattern for HAS each method will be given a package under 
`...contract.impl.exec.systemcontracts.has` with two classes:
* `[method]Translator` - which first confirms that the call is for the given method, and
  then builds a `TransactionBody` for it.
* `[method]Call` - which takes that `TransactionBody` and then has an `execute()` method
  that does the work.

> ## Design for `isVirtualAddress`

Reviewer 2: Drop this section.

may be several/many per Hedera account, there is in fact only _one_: the _alias_.

* This mainly affects the method `getVirtualAddresses` which will return an array, but
it will have _at most one_ EVM address in it.
  
## Phased implementation

The first release of HIP-632 will include only `isAuthorizedRaw`.

## Where does this go?

A "hedera account service" system contract is being set up in
`com.hedera.node.app.service.contract.impl.exec.systemcontracts.has`, and also at
`...contract.impl.exec.processors.HasTranslatorsModule` (for the individual methods).

Following the existing pattern for HAS each method will be given a package under 
`...contract.impl.exec.systemcontracts.has` with two classes:
* `[method]Translator` - which first confirms that the call is for the given method, and
  then builds a `TransactionBody` for it.
* `[method]Call` - which takes that `TransactionBody` and then has an `execute()` method
  that does the work.
  
## Design for `isAuthorizedRaw`

[TBD shortly as I fix up some problems with understanding HAS]

`isAuthorizedRaw` has two flows: Either the argument address is a Hedera account, or it is
an EVM address.

> * If an EVM address then this is simply the `ECRECOVER` precompile.  We have direct

Reviewer 2: This may not be the case always right?
You could have an evm address that is a Hedera account id alias i.e. long zero.
In that case it wouldn't use `ecrecover` but would rather use the same flow as we could for an accountId

Author: As written HIP-632 specifically disallows long-zero addresses:

1) `isVirtualAddress` is defined to return `false` for a long-zero
2) When `isVirtualAddress` returns `false` then `isAuthorizedRaw` immediately returns `false`.

Maybe we could do better?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, for the mentioned methods that makes sense but for `isAuthorized{Raw}()` given it just checks authorization I don't see any need for it not to work unless there's a concern unmentioned.

Author: Will add this suggestion (+ an update to the HIP) to the epic for the rest of -632.

fee now.

## TBD

* `isAuthorizedRaw` requires a message hash.  For EVM addresses, with an EC key, 
the message hash is a
KECCAK256 which is provided directly by the EVM and is relatively inexpensive.  But for
Hedera accounts, with an ED key, the message hash is a SHA384 which can, at this time,
only be computed by an expensive EVM script - on the order of ~1.5-2M gas.  We should
provide a way for the contract to compute this hash at the same level of expense as the
KECCAK256 version.
  
* `isAuthorized{Raw}` does a relatively expensive (resource-wise) computation that should
be charged for.  Currently we have no fee schedule for charging fees (gas or otherwise) for
system contract calls, not to mention varying the fee for individual system contract
methods.  (All existing system contract methods are either "cheap" - as in too small to
charge for - or involve child transactions that themselves do incur fees.)  We _can_
charge hard-coded fees.
  * TBD #1: A fee schedule
mechanism to charge fees for individual system contract methods 
  * TBD #2: How do we choose the fee for the Hedera signature verification part of
`isAuthorized` and `isAuthorizedRaw`?

> 

Reviewer 2: Missing E2E test section.
Let's call out some positive and negative scenarios.

`HederaWorldUpdator.Enhancement` which can map from an EVM address to the Hedera account it
is an alias for.  This functionality is provided by `HasCallAttempt.linkedAccount()`.

## Design for `isAuthorizedRaw`

[TBD shortly as I fix up some problems with understanding HAS]

`isAuthorizedRaw` has two flows: Either the argument address is a Hedera account, or it is
an EVM address.

* If an EVM address then this is simply the `ECRECOVER` precompile.  We have direct
access to the `ECRECOVER` precompile from BESU in the class
`org.hyperledger.besu.evm.precompile.ECRECPrecompiledContract` which will compute
the `ECRECOVER` operation given the message hash + signature (encoded as a calldata for
the precompile) (and a `MessageFrame` which it ignores).  This returns either the
recovered address, if successful, or "empty", if not.  The recovered address must then
match the address given as an argument to `isAuthorizedRaw`.
  
* If an Hedera account then it gets the account, looks in it to find a key _which it must
have_ and which must be a _single key_ (otherwise: failure).  Then given the key and the
signature verifies that the signature matches the message hash and is attested by 

> the account. This is an operation provided by `HandleContext` (which can be accessed via

Reviewer: A little more detail would be nice (which methods are needed from `HandleContext` and what information do they provide.

Author: Will do.

the `HederaWorldUpdater.Enhancement`).

## TBD

* `isAuthorizedRaw` requires a message hash.  For EVM addresses, with an EC key, 
the message hash is a
KECCAK256 which is provided directly by the EVM and is relatively inexpensive.  But for
Hedera accounts, with an ED key, the message hash is a SHA384 which can, at this time,
only be computed by an expensive EVM script - on the order of ~1.5-2M gas.  We should
provide a way for the contract to compute this hash at the same level of expense as the
KECCAK256 version.
  
* `isAuthorized{Raw}` does a relatively expensive (resource-wise) computation that should
be charged for.  Currently we have no method for charging fees (gas or otherwise) for
system contract calls, not to mention varying the fee for individual system contract
methods.  (All existing system contract methods are either "cheap" - as in too small to
charge for - or involve child transactions that themselves do incur fees.) 
  * TBD #1: A
mechanism to charge fees for individual system contract methods 

>   * TBD #2: How do we

Reviewer 2: matching ecrecover is a good starting point. It works for the EC case but an additional buffer may be needed for the node logic.
We should charge at least the amount of an HCS transaction with a matching key structure that requires validation.

We may consider a hard coded hbar value based on the piping options available to us.

Author: Ah, I wasn't clear.  I can charge a _hard coded_ amount, e.g., the 3000gas that `ECRECOVER` charges.  I can't charge some fee-schedule amount specific to this method.  I'll rewrite this.
